docs: Rewrite Layout Transition documentation page (#6144)
software-mansion/react-native-reanimated: packages/docs-reanimated/docs/layout-animations/layout-transitions.mdx

# Layout transitions

Layout transitions allows you to replace layout changes with smooth transitions. Each layout change may include changes of size and position and both of them can be animated.

import LayoutTransitions from '@site/src/examples/LayoutTransitions';
import LayoutTransitionsSrc from '!!raw-loader!@site/src/examples/LayoutTransitions';

<InteractiveExample src={LayoutTransitionsSrc} component={LayoutTransitions} />

## Predefined Transitions

> Below we listed all of the currently available predefined layout transitions with their [layout animation modifiers](/docs/fundamentals/glossary#layout-animation-modifier).

Author: weird, the scrolling works for me

https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/8619e282-4657-426c-b18f-fee66e654d53

> Below we listed all of the currently available predefined layout transitions with their [layout animation modifiers](/docs/fundamentals/glossary#layout-animation-modifier).

Reviewer: Seems like a problem on my end..

## Linear transition

Linear transition animates both position and dimension in the same way.

### Reference

```js
import { LinearTransition } from 'react-native-reanimated';

function App() {
  return <Animated.View layout={LinearTransition} />;
}
```

### Modifiers

#### Easing <Optional/>

Time-based modifiers relay on [`withTiming`](/docs/animations/withTiming) function.

```javascript
LinearTransition.easing(Easing.ease);
```

- `.easing(easingFunction: EasingFunction)` is an easing function which defines the animation curve. Defaults to `Easing.inOut(Easing.quad)`

:::note
The `.easing(...)` modifier have no effect when `.springify()` is used.
:::

#### Spring-based <Optional/>

Spring-based modifiers relay on [`withSpring`](/docs/animations/withSpring) function.

> Just as in withSpring config, spring-based modifiers can be physics-based (has `mass` and `damping` modifiers) or duration-based (has `duration` and `dampingRatio` modifiers).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Just as in `withSpring` config, spring-based modifiers can be physics-based (have `mass` and `damping` modifiers) or duration-based (have `duration` and `dampingRatio` modifiers).
```

:::info
The `mass` and `damping` (physics-based) properties can't be used at the same time as `duration` and `dampingRatio` (duration-based).

When used together `duration` and `dampingRatio` overrides `mass` and `damping` props.
:::

```javascript
LinearTransition.springify()
  .damping(30)
  .mass(5)
  .rotate(20)
  .stiffness(10)
  .overshootClamping(false)
  .restDisplacementThreshold(0.1)
  .restSpeedThreshold(5);
```

- `.springify()` enables the spring-based animation configuration.
- `.damping(value: number)` decides how quickly a spring stops moving. Higher damping means the spring will come to rest faster. Defaults to `10`.

> - `.dampingRatio(value: number)` decides how damped the spring is. Value `1` means the spring is critically dmaped, and value `>1` means the spring is overdamped. Defaults to `0.5`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `.dampingRatio(value: number)` decides how damped the spring is. Value `1` means the spring is critically damped, and value `>1` means the spring is overdamped. Defaults to `0.5`.
```

- `.mass(value: number)` is the weight of the spring. Reducing this value makes the animation faster. Defaults to `1`.
- `.rotate(degree: string)` lets you rotate the element.

> - `.stiffness(value: number)` decides how bouncy the spring is. Defaults to `100`.

Reviewer: More info needed. Does it mean that increasing stiffness increases bounciness of the spring, or the other way? I'd add that clarification

- `.overshootClamping(value: boolean)` decides whether a spring can bounce over the designated position. Defaults to `false`.
- `.restDisplacementThreshold(value: number)` is the displacement below which the spring will snap to the designated position without further oscillations. Defaults to `0.001`.

> - `.restSpeedThreshold(value: number)` is the speed in pixels per second from which the spring will snap to the designated position without further oscillations. Defaults to `2`.

Reviewer: `from which`, `below which` or `at which`?

```javascript
LinearTransition.delay(500)
  .reduceMotion(ReduceMotion.Never)
  .withInitialValues({ transform: [{ translateY: 420 }] })
  .withCallback((finished) => {
    console.log(`finished without interruptions: ${finished}`);
  });
```

- `.duration(duration: number)` sets length of the animation (in milliseconds). Defaults to '300'.
- `.delay(duration: number)` is the delay before the animation starts (in milliseconds). Defaults to `0`.
- `.reduceMotion(reduceMotion: ReduceMotion)` determines how the animation responds to the device's reduced motion [accessibility](/docs/guides/accessibility) setting.
- `.withInitialValues(values: StyleProps)` allows to override the initial config of the animation.
- `.withCallback(callback: (finished: boolean) => void)` is the callback that will fire after the animation ends. Sets `finished` to `true` when animation ends without interruptions, and `false` otherwise.

### Example

<ExampleVideo
  sources={{
    android:
      '/react-native-reanimated/recordings/layout_transitions/android_linear_transition.mov',
    ios: '/react-native-reanimated/recordings/layout_transitions/ios_linear_transition.mov',
  }}
/>

## Sequenced Transition

> Sequenced transition animates first x-position and width, then later y-position and height.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sequenced transition animates x-position and width first, then y-position and height.
```

function App() {
  return <Animated.View layout={JumpingTransition} />;
}
```

### Modifiers

```javascript
JumpingTransition.duration(1000)
  .delay(500)
  .reduceMotion(ReduceMotion.Never)
  .withCallback((finished) => {
    console.log(`finished without interruptions: ${finished}`);
  });
```

- `.duration(duration: number)` sets length of the animation (in milliseconds). Defaults to '300'.
- `.delay(duration: number)` is the delay before the animation starts (in milliseconds). Defaults to `0`.
- `.reduceMotion(reduceMotion: ReduceMotion)` determines how the animation responds to the device's reduced motion [accessibility](/docs/guides/accessibility) setting.
- `.withCallback(callback: (finished: boolean) => void)` is the callback that will fire after the animation ends. Sets `finished` to `true` when animation ends without interruptions, and `false` otherwise.

### Example

<ExampleVideo
  sources={{
    android:
      '/react-native-reanimated/recordings/layout_transitions/android_jumping_transition.mov',
    ios: '/react-native-reanimated/recordings/layout_transitions/ios_jumping_transition.mov',
  }}
/>

## Curved Transition

> Curved transition enables to animate each position and dimension with different easing. It makes component movement path look curved.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Curved transition enables animation of all parameters (`X`, `Y`, `width`, `height`) with different easing each. It makes component movement path look curved.
```

### Reference

```js
import { CurvedTransiton } from 'react-native-reanimated';

function App() {
  return <Animated.View layout={CurvedTransiton} />;
}
```

### Modifiers

```javascript
CurvedTransiton.duration(1000)
  .delay(500)
  .easingX(Easing.in(Easing.exp))
  .easingY(Easing.out(Easing.quad))
  .easingWidth(Easing.in(Easing.ease))
  .easingHeight(Easing.out(Easing.exp))
  .reduceMotion(ReduceMotion.Never)
  .withCallback((finished) => {
    console.log(`finished without interruptions: ${finished}`);
  });
```

> - `.duration(duration: number)` sets length of the animation (in milliseconds). Defaults to '300'.

Reviewer: I'd add a note that length is shared for all the easings (isn't it?). Might go into remarks as well

Author: I'll put that into remarks, just as in EntryExit transition

- `.withCallback(callback: (finished: boolean) => void)` is the callback that will fire after the animation ends. Sets `finished` to `true` when animation ends without interruptions, and `false` otherwise.

### Example

<ExampleVideo
  sources={{
    android:
      '/react-native-reanimated/recordings/layout_transitions/android_curved_transition.mov',
    ios: '/react-native-reanimated/recordings/layout_transitions/ios_curved_transition.mov',
  }}
/>

## Entry/Exit Transition

Entry/Exit transition lets you choose layout animations for entering and exiting. It combines both of them into a one and applies to the layout. Moreover, instead of picking currently available animations, you are welcome to create your own one.

### Reference

```js
import { EntryExitTransition } from 'react-native-reanimated';

function App() {
  return <Animated.View layout={EntryExitTransition} />;
}
```

### Modifiers

```javascript
EntryExitTransition.duration(1000)
  .delay(500)
  .reduceMotion(ReduceMotion.Never)
  .withCallback((finished) => {
    console.log(`finished without interruptions: ${finished}`);
  });

> ```

Reviewer: I'd suggest adding some .exiting and .entering modifiers here so that users can see how it should be done

- `.restSpeedThreshold(value: number)` is the speed in pixels per second below which the spring will snap to the designated position without further oscillations. Defaults to `2`.

#### Common <Optional/>

```javascript
LinearTransition.delay(500)
  .reduceMotion(ReduceMotion.Never)
  .withInitialValues({ transform: [{ translateY: 420 }] })
  .withCallback((finished) => {
    console.log(`finished without interruptions: ${finished}`);
  });
```

- `.duration(duration: number)` sets length of the animation (in milliseconds). Defaults to '300'.
- `.delay(duration: number)` is the delay before the animation starts (in milliseconds). Defaults to `0`.
- `.reduceMotion(reduceMotion: ReduceMotion)` determines how the animation responds to the device's reduced motion [accessibility](/docs/guides/accessibility) setting.
- `.withInitialValues(values: StyleProps)` allows to override the initial config of the animation.
- `.withCallback(callback: (finished: boolean) => void)` is the callback that will fire after the animation ends. Sets `finished` to `true` when animation ends without interruptions, and `false` otherwise.

### Remarks

> - The animation will be interrupted if **both** the speed is below restSpeedTreshold and the distance is less than restDisplacementTreshold. Keep in mind that if you haven't set one of the thresholds, its value will be set to the default.

Reviewer: NIT: I'd hihglight mentioned modifiers
```suggestion
- The animation will be interrupted if **both** the animation speed is below `restSpeedTreshold` and the distance to its end is less than `restDisplacementTreshold`. Keep in mind that if you haven't set one of the thresholds, its value will be set to the default.
```

# Layout transitions

> Layout transition allows you to animate changes in the layout of elements.

Reviewer 2: This information doesn't explain what do they do, I would suggest:
```suggestion
Providing a layout transition into an UI element alters each layout change into a smooth transition. A layout change may consist of both changes of size and position and both of them can be animated with layout transition.
```
You can optionally make something bold here.

> Providing a layout transition into an UI element alters each layout change into a smooth transition. A layout change may consist of both changes of size and position and both of them can be animated with layout transition.

Author: Before previous changes from Latropos, it was something like this:
```Layout transition allows you to animate changes in the layout of elements.```
Is it better?

> Providing a layout transition into an UI element alters each layout change into a smooth transition. A layout change may consist of both changes of size and position and both of them can be animated with layout transition.

Reviewer 2: IDK, but if you want to rephrase it simpler, you can try this direction:

1. Providing a layout transition into an UI element alters each layout change into a smooth transition.
⬇️
Layout transitions replace **layout changes** with smooth transitions.

2. Layout change may consist of both changes of size and position and both of them can be animated with layout transition.
⬇️
Each layout change may include changes of **size** and **position** and both of them can be animated.

Also using bold to highlight most important parts could be helpful. I really like the summary to mention that layout change include size, since it is not obvious and our entering & existing animations have nothing to do with size

> Providing a layout transition into an UI element alters each layout change into a smooth transition. A layout change may consist of both changes of size and position and both of them can be animated with layout transition.

Author: So maybe something like that?

Layout transitions allows you to replace layout changes with smooth transitions. Each layout change may include changes of size and position and both of them can be animated.

import LayoutTransitions from '@site/src/examples/LayoutTransitions';
import LayoutTransitionsSrc from '!!raw-loader!@site/src/examples/LayoutTransitions';
import ExampleVideo from '@site/src/components/ExampleVideo';

<InteractiveExample src={LayoutTransitionsSrc} component={LayoutTransitions} />

## Predefined Transitions

Below we listed all of the currently available predefined layout transitions with their [layout animation modifiers](/docs/fundamentals/glossary#layout-animation-modifier).

## Linear transition

Linear transition animates both position and dimension in the same way.

### Reference

```js
import { LinearTransition } from 'react-native-reanimated';

function App() {
  return <Animated.View layout={LinearTransition} />;
}
```

### Modifiers

> #### Time-based <Optional/>

Reviewer 2: We have also Time-based spring modifiers, Physics-based spring modifiers and common spring modifiers.
So I believe that we shouldn't use this term here.
```suggestion
#### Easing <Optional/>
```

Time-based modifiers relay on [`withTiming`](/docs/animations/withTiming) function.

```javascript

> LinearTransition.duration(500).easing(Easing.ease);

Reviewer 2: Duration used to be among Time-based modifiers, but it no longer is.
```suggestion
LinearTransition.easing(Easing.ease);
```

```

- `.easing(easingFunction: EasingFunction)` is an easing function which defines the animation curve. Defaults to `Easing.inOut(Easing.quad)`

> :::note
> Time-based modifiers have no effect when `.springify()` is used.
> :::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:::note
The `.esing( ... )` modifier have no effect when `.springify()` is used.
:::
```

> #### Spring-based <Optional/>

Reviewer 2: See withSpring documentation for the list of modifiers: https://docs.swmansion.com/react-native-reanimated/docs/animations/withSpring
Generally usage of any of time-based spring modifiers erases the effect of any physics-based spring modifier, so I have a feeling that it would look bit more natural to these groups as two columns next to each other. And the warning should be here instead of inside remarks

Author: I think to be consistent, the list of LinearTransition modifiers should stay as a list, as it could 'mislead' the user - user has access by link to see withSpring() config where it is grouped into more informative tables - what do you think?

Reviewer 2: Sure

Spring-based modifiers relay on [`withSpring`](/docs/animations/withSpring) function.

```javascript
LinearTransition.springify()
  .damping(30)
  .mass(5)
  .rotate(20)
  .stiffness(10)
  .overshootClamping(false)
  .restDisplacementThreshold(0.1)
  .restSpeedThreshold(5);
```

- `.springify()` enables the spring-based animation configuration.
- `.damping(value: number)` decides how quickly a spring stops moving. Higher damping means the spring will come to rest faster. Defaults to `10`.
- `.dampingRatio(value: number)` decides how damped the spring is. Value `1` means the spring is critically dmaped, and value `>1` means the spring is overdamped. Defaults to `0.5`.

> - `.mass(value: number)` is the weight of the spring. Reducing this value makes the animation faster. Defaults to `1`.

Reviewer 2: There is no info, what is default - time or physics based. but perhaps there is no need for that.

Author: I will add it for better info :like:

- `.rotate(degree: string)` lets you rotate the element.
- `.stiffness(value: number)` decides how bouncy the spring is. Defaults to `100`.
- `.overshootClamping(value: boolean)` decides whether a spring can bounce over the designated position. Defaults to `false`.
- `.restDisplacementThreshold(value: number)` is the displacement below which the spring will snap to the designated position without further oscillations. Defaults to `0.001`.
- `.restSpeedThreshold(value: number)` is the speed in pixels per second from which the spring will snap to the designated position without further oscillations. Defaults to `2`.

#### Common <Optional/>

```javascript
LinearTransition.delay(500)
  .reduceMotion(ReduceMotion.Never)
  .withInitialValues({ transform: [{ translateY: 420 }] })
  .withCallback((finished) => {
    console.log(`finished without interruptions: ${finished}`);
  });
```

- `.duration(duration: number)` sets length of the animation (in milliseconds). Defaults to '300'.

> - `.delay(durationMs: number)` is the delay before the animation starts (in milliseconds). Defaults to `0`.

Reviewer 3: Can we unify names of duration parameters? sometimes we uses `duration` but also `durationMs`

Author: It was taken from naming conventions inside Reanimated, but i will change it to `duration` for clearance.

> - `.reduceMotion(reduceMotion: ReduceMotion)` determines how the animation responds to the device's reduced motion accessibility setting.

Reviewer 3: Maybe it would be helpful if we link pages that describes type `ReduceMotion` here

- `.withInitialValues(values: StyleProps)` allows to override the initial config of the animation.
- `.withCallback(callback: (finished: boolean) => void)` is the callback that will fire after the animation ends. Sets `finished` to `true` when animation ends without interruptions, and `false` otherwise.

### Remarks

> - Just as in [withSpring](/docs/animations/withSpring/) config, spring-based modifiers can be physics-based (has `mass` and `damping` modifiers) or duration-based (has `duration` and `dampingRatio` modifiers). You need to decide whether you want to use physics or duration based animation.

Reviewer 2: I think this should be somewhere above in spring section

> - Just as in [withSpring](/docs/animations/withSpring/) config, spring-based modifiers can be physics-based (has `mass` and `damping` modifiers) or duration-based (has `duration` and `dampingRatio` modifiers). You need to decide whether you want to use physics or duration based animation.

Reviewer 3: Is it a duplication of a text from the beginning of the section?

Author: Yes, i forgot to remove this 😄

### Example

<ExampleVideo
  sources={{
    android:
      '/react-native-reanimated/recordings/layout_transitions/android_linear_transition.mov',
    ios: '/react-native-reanimated/recordings/layout_transitions/ios_linear_transition.mov',
  }}
/>

### Platform compatibility

<div className="platform-compatibility">

| Android | iOS | Web |
| ------- | --- | --- |
| ✅      | ✅  | ✅  |

</div>

## Sequenced Transition

Sequenced transition animates first x-position and width, then later y-position and height.

### Reference

```js
import { SequencedTransition } from 'react-native-reanimated';

function App() {
  return <Animated.View layout={SequencedTransition} />;
}
```

### Modifiers

```javascript
SequencedTransition.duration(1000)
  .delay(500)
  .reverse()
  .reduceMotion(ReduceMotion.Never)
  .withCallback((finished) => {
    console.log(`finished without interruptions: ${finished}`);
  });
```

> - `.duration(duration: number)` sets length of the animation (in milliseconds). Defaults to '500'.

Reviewer 2: This is too slow. Perhaps we will speed it up and unify it to have 300ms everywhere.

}
```

### Modifiers

```javascript
JumpingTransition.duration(1000)
  .delay(500)
  .reduceMotion(ReduceMotion.Never)
  .withCallback((finished) => {
    console.log(`finished without interruptions: ${finished}`);
  });
```

- `.duration(duration: number)` sets length of the animation (in milliseconds). Defaults to '300'.
- `.delay(durationMs: number)` is the delay before the animation starts (in milliseconds). Defaults to `0`.
- `.reduceMotion(reduceMotion: ReduceMotion)` determines how the animation responds to the device's reduced motion accessibility setting.
- `.withCallback(callback: (finished: boolean) => void)` is the callback that will fire after the animation ends. Sets `finished` to `true` when animation ends without interruptions, and `false` otherwise.

### Example

<ExampleVideo
  sources={{
    android:
      '/react-native-reanimated/recordings/layout_transitions/android_jumping_transition.mov',
    ios: '/react-native-reanimated/recordings/layout_transitions/ios_jumping_transition.mov',
  }}
/>

### Platform compatibility

<div className="platform-compatibility">

| Android | iOS | Web |
| ------- | --- | --- |
| ✅      | ✅  | ✅  |

</div>

## Curved Transition

> Curved transition enables to animate each position and dimension with different easing. It makes animation look curved.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Curved transition enables to animate each position and dimension with different easing. It makes component movement path look curved.
```

- `.delay(durationMs: number)` is the delay before the animation starts (in milliseconds). Defaults to `0`.
- `.easingX(easing: EasingFunction)` defines easing animation for x-position.
- `.easingY(easing: EasingFunction)` defines easing animation for y-position.
- `.easingWidth(easing: EasingFunction)` defines easing animation for width.
- `.easingHeight(easing: EasingFunction)` defines easing animation for height.
- `.reduceMotion(reduceMotion: ReduceMotion)` determines how the animation responds to the device's reduced motion accessibility setting.
- `.withCallback(callback: (finished: boolean) => void)` is the callback that will fire after the animation ends. Sets `finished` to `true` when animation ends without interruptions, and `false` otherwise.

### Example

<ExampleVideo
  sources={{
    android:
      '/react-native-reanimated/recordings/layout_transitions/android_curved_transition.mov',
    ios: '/react-native-reanimated/recordings/layout_transitions/ios_curved_transition.mov',
  }}
/>

### Platform compatibility

<div className="platform-compatibility">

| Android | iOS | Web |
| ------- | --- | --- |
| ✅      | ✅  | ❌  |

</div>

## Entry/Exit Transition

> Entry/Exit transition lets you choose layout animations for entering and exiting. Moreover, instead of picking currently available animations, you are welcome to create your own one.

Reviewer 3: It suggests a bit that it sets animations for mounting and unmounting instead of combining both animations into a single one and applying them on layout changes.

Author: I changed it so it includes the `combining` part, let me know what you think C:

Author: Entry/Exit transition lets you choose layout animations for entering and exiting. It combines both of them into a single one and applies to the layout. Moreover, instead of picking currently available animations, you are welcome to create your own one.
